README.md, before:

# dump1090-fa Debian/Raspbian packages

dump1090-fa is a ADS-B, Mode S, and Mode 3A/3C demodulator and decoder that
will receive and decode aircraft transponder messages received via
a directly connected software defined radio, or from data provided over a
network connection.

It is the successor to
[dump1090-mutability](https://github.com/mutability/dump1090) and is
maintained by [FlightAware](http://flightaware.com/).

It can provide a display of locally received aircraft data in a terminal or
via a browser map. Together with [PiAware](http://flightaware.com/adsb/piaware)
it can be used to contribute crowd-sourced flight tracking data to FlightAware.

It is designed to build as a Debian package, but should also be buildable on
many other Linux or Unix-like systems.

## Building under bullseye, buster, or stretch

```bash
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential fakeroot debhelper librtlsdr-dev pkg-config libncurses5-dev libbladerf-dev libhackrf-dev liblimesuite-dev
$ ./prepare-build.sh bullseye    # or buster, or stretch
$ cd package-bullseye            # or buster, or stretch
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign
```

## Building with limited dependencies

(Supported for bullseye and buster builds only)

The package supports some build profiles to allow building without all
required SDR libraries being present. This will produce a package with
limited SDR support only.

Pass `--build-profiles` to `dpkg-buildpackage` with a comma-separated list of
profiles. The list of profiles should include `custom` and zero or more of
`rtlsdr`, `bladerf`, `hackrf`, `limesdr` depending on what you want:

```bash
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom,rtlsdr          # builds with rtlsdr support only
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom,rtlsdr,bladerf  # builds with rtlsdr and bladeRF support
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom                 # builds with _no_ SDR support (network support only)
```

## Building manually

You can probably just run "make" after installing the required dependencies.
Binaries are built in the source directory; you will need to arrange to
install them (and a method for starting them) yourself.

``make BLADERF=no`` will disable bladeRF support and remove the dependency on
libbladeRF.

``make RTLSDR=no`` will disable rtl-sdr support and remove the dependency on
librtlsdr.

``make HACKRF=no`` will disable HackRF support and remove the dependency on 
libhackrf.

``make LIMESDR=no`` will disable LimeSDR support and remove the dependency on
libLimeSuite.

## Building on OSX

Minimal testing on Mojave 10.14.6, YMMV.

```
$ brew install librtlsdr
$ brew install libbladerf
$ brew install hackrf
$ brew install pkg-config
$ make
```

## Building on FreeBSD

Minimal testing on 12.1-RELEASE, YMMV.

```
# pkg install gmake
# pkg install pkgconf
# pkg install rtl-sdr
# pkg install bladerf
# pkg install hackrf
$ gmake
```

## Generating wisdom files

dump1090-fa uses [starch](https://github.com/flightaware/starch) to build
multiple versions of the DSP code and choose the fastest supported by the
hardware at runtime. The implementations chosen can been seen by running
`dump1090-fa --version`.

The implementations used are controlled by "wisdom files", a list of
implementations to use in order of priority. For each DSP function, the first
implementation listed that's supported by the current hardware is used.
By default dump1090-fa provides compiled-in wisdom for [x86](wisdom.x86),
[ARM 32-bit](wisdom.arm), and [ARM 64-bit](wisdom.aarch64). If the defaults
are not suitable for your hardware or if you're building on a different
architecture, you may want to generate your own external wisdom file.

Ideally, to get stable results, you want to do this on an idle system
with CPU frequency scaling disabled. Running the benchmarks will take
some time (10s of minutes).

### Package installs

Run `/usr/share/dump1090-fa/generate-wisdom`. Wait.

Follow the instructions to copy the resulting wisdom file to `/etc/dump1090-fa/wisdom.local`.

Restart dump1090.

### Manual installs

Run `make wisdom.local`. Wait.

Copy the resulting `wisdom.local` file somewhere appropriate.

Update the dump1090-fa command-line options to include `--wisdom /path/to/wisdom.local`

Commit message:

Squashed commit of the following:
commit 8adfa14bc07fea86023aa2317fb0c9c0e90a1d31
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Mon Nov 14 18:43:59 2022 +0300

    Updated build steps for MSYS2...

    fixed a newly introduced build issue caused by ncurses in MSYS2 builds.

commit 181cc91d834ddd69d44ed296060d20ebbd3f5f36
Merge: 4367dae 9aee367
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Fri Aug 26 22:13:28 2022 +0300

    Merge branch 'dev' into dev-win-support

commit 4367daec9f54203d63b9c33866a39f6ab3a782fd
Merge: 2f67083 059e48b
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Thu Nov 18 03:07:10 2021 +0300

    Merge branch 'dev' into dev-win-support

commit 2f67083f65242d4f78df71096683f3b2c01456c8
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Thu Aug 5 13:37:33 2021 +0300

    Removed Windows UCRT building instructions...

    UCRT is not supported at the moment as it doesn't support C11 yet.

commit 8ebf6b63bd6b0b83baf120d486c4b47c8321d52f
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Wed Aug 4 15:00:41 2021 +0300

    Added Windows support

commit 7247109a28ef5c339da7aedec82b149d3913647d
Author: SnakePin <18491360+SnakePin@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Wed Aug 4 14:45:36 2021 +0300

    Added Windows executables to the .gitignore

README.md, after:

# dump1090-fa Debian/Raspbian packages

dump1090-fa is a ADS-B, Mode S, and Mode 3A/3C demodulator and decoder that
will receive and decode aircraft transponder messages received via
a directly connected software defined radio, or from data provided over a
network connection.

It is the successor to
[dump1090-mutability](https://github.com/mutability/dump1090) and is
maintained by [FlightAware](http://flightaware.com/).

It can provide a display of locally received aircraft data in a terminal or
via a browser map. Together with [PiAware](http://flightaware.com/adsb/piaware)
it can be used to contribute crowd-sourced flight tracking data to FlightAware.

It is designed to build as a Debian package, but should also be buildable on
many other Linux or Unix-like systems.

## Building under bullseye, buster, or stretch

```bash
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential fakeroot debhelper librtlsdr-dev pkg-config libncurses5-dev libbladerf-dev libhackrf-dev liblimesuite-dev
$ ./prepare-build.sh bullseye    # or buster, or stretch
$ cd package-bullseye            # or buster, or stretch
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign
```

## Building with limited dependencies

(Supported for bullseye and buster builds only)

The package supports some build profiles to allow building without all
required SDR libraries being present. This will produce a package with
limited SDR support only.

Pass `--build-profiles` to `dpkg-buildpackage` with a comma-separated list of
profiles. The list of profiles should include `custom` and zero or more of
`rtlsdr`, `bladerf`, `hackrf`, `limesdr` depending on what you want:

```bash
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom,rtlsdr          # builds with rtlsdr support only
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom,rtlsdr,bladerf  # builds with rtlsdr and bladeRF support
$ dpkg-buildpackage -b --no-sign --build-profiles=custom                 # builds with _no_ SDR support (network support only)
```

## Building manually

You can probably just run "make" after installing the required dependencies.
Binaries are built in the source directory; you will need to arrange to
install them (and a method for starting them) yourself.

``make BLADERF=no`` will disable bladeRF support and remove the dependency on
libbladeRF.

``make RTLSDR=no`` will disable rtl-sdr support and remove the dependency on
librtlsdr.

``make HACKRF=no`` will disable HackRF support and remove the dependency on 
libhackrf.

``make LIMESDR=no`` will disable LimeSDR support and remove the dependency on
libLimeSuite.

## Building on MSYS2
1. Install PothosSDR to `C:\PothosSDR\` and install MSYS2.
> The PothosSDR path can't have spaces in it because the MinGW gcc
doesn't recognize Windows style paths with escaped spaces in them
which is what the pkg-config returns.
2. Remove the following headers `pthread.h, semaphore.h, sched.h` from `<PothosSDR root>/include`.
> MSYS2 already has these POSIX headers and we need the compiler to use the default headers.

#### Building with MinGW-w64
```
$ pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-toolchain mingw-w64-x86_64-ncurses mingw-w64-x86_64-libsystre mingw-w64-x86_64-libusb
$ alias make=mingw32-make
$ PKG_CONFIG_PATH="/c/PothosSDR/lib/pkgconfig:$PKG_CONFIG_PATH" make -j$(nproc)
```
#### Building with Clang
```
$ pacman -S mingw-w64-clang-x86_64-toolchain mingw-w64-clang-x86_64-ncurses mingw-w64-clang-x86_64-libsystre mingw-w64-clang-x86_64-libusb
$ alias make=mingw32-make
$ PKG_CONFIG_PATH="/c/PothosSDR/lib/pkgconfig:$PKG_CONFIG_PATH" make -j$(nproc)
```

## Building on OSX

Minimal testing on Mojave 10.14.6, YMMV.

```
$ brew install librtlsdr
$ brew install libbladerf
$ brew install hackrf
$ brew install pkg-config
$ make
```

## Building on FreeBSD

Minimal testing on 12.1-RELEASE, YMMV.

```
# pkg install gmake
# pkg install pkgconf
# pkg install rtl-sdr
# pkg install bladerf
# pkg install hackrf
$ gmake
```

## Generating wisdom files

dump1090-fa uses [starch](https://github.com/flightaware/starch) to build
multiple versions of the DSP code and choose the fastest supported by the
hardware at runtime. The implementations chosen can been seen by running
`dump1090-fa --version`.

The implementations used are controlled by "wisdom files", a list of
implementations to use in order of priority. For each DSP function, the first
implementation listed that's supported by the current hardware is used.
By default dump1090-fa provides compiled-in wisdom for [x86](wisdom.x86),
[ARM 32-bit](wisdom.arm), and [ARM 64-bit](wisdom.aarch64). If the defaults
are not suitable for your hardware or if you're building on a different
architecture, you may want to generate your own external wisdom file.

Ideally, to get stable results, you want to do this on an idle system
with CPU frequency scaling disabled. Running the benchmarks will take
some time (10s of minutes).

### Package installs

Run `/usr/share/dump1090-fa/generate-wisdom`. Wait.

Follow the instructions to copy the resulting wisdom file to `/etc/dump1090-fa/wisdom.local`.

Restart dump1090.

### Manual installs

Run `make wisdom.local`. Wait.

Copy the resulting `wisdom.local` file somewhere appropriate.

Update the dump1090-fa command-line options to include `--wisdom /path/to/wisdom.local`
